The magic of a word—Dada—which has brought journalists to the gates of a world unforeseen,
is of no importance to us.
To put out a manifesto you must want: ABC
to fulminate against 1, 2, 3
to fly into a rage and sharpen your wings to conquer and disseminate little abcs and big abcs, to
sign, shout, swear, to organize prose into a form of absolute and irrefutable evidence, to prove
your non plus ultra and maintain that novelty resembles life just as the latest-appearance of
some whore proves the essence of God. His existence was previously proved by the
accordion, the landscape, the wheedling word. To impose your ABC is a natural thing—
hence deplorable. Everybody does it in the form of crystalbluffmadonna, monetary system,
pharmaceutical product, or a bare leg advertising the ardent sterile spring. The love of
novelty is the cross of sympathy, demonstrates a naive je m'enfoutisme, it is a transitory,
positive sign without a cause.
But this need itself is obsolete. In documenting art on the basis of the supreme
simplicity: novelty, we are human and true for the sake of amusement, impulsive, vibrant to
crucify boredom. At the crossroads of the lights, alert, attentively awaiting the years, in the
forest. I write a manifesto and I want nothing, yet 1 say certain things, and in principle I am
against manifestoes, as I am also against principles (half-pints to measure the moral value of
every phrase too too convenient; approximation was invented by the impressionists). I write
this manifesto to show that people can perform contrary actions together while taking one
fresh gulp of air; I am against action; for continuous contradiction, for affirmation too, I am
neither for nor against and I do not explain because I hate common sense. […]
Dada Means Nothing
If you find it futile and don't want to waste your time on a word that means nothing ... The
first thought that comes to these people is bacteriological in character: to find its
etymological, or at least its historical or psychological origin. We see by the papers that the
Kru Negroes call the tail of a holy cow Dada. The cube and the mother in a certain district of
Italy are called: Dada. A hobby horse, a nurse both in Russian and Rumanian: Dada. Some
learned journalists regard it as an art for babies, other holy jesusescallingthelittlechildren of
our day, as a relapse into a dry and noisy, noisy and monotonous primitivism. Sensibility is
not constructed on the basis of a word; all constructions converge on perfection which is
boring, the stagnant idea of a gilded swamp, a relative human product. A work of art should
not be beauty in itself, for beauty is dead; it should be neither gay nor sad, neither light nor
dark to rejoice or torture the individual by serving him the cakes of sacred aureoles or the
sweets of a vaulted race through the atmospheres. A work of art is never beautiful by decree,
objectively and for all. Hence criticism is useless, it exists only subjectively, for each man
separately, without the slightest character of universality. Does anyone think he has found a
psychic base common to all mankind? The attempt of Jesus and the Bible covers with their
broad benevolent wings: shit, animals, days. How can one expect to put order into the chaos

that constitutes that infinite and shapeless variation: man? The principle: "love thy neighbor”
is a hypocrisy. “Know thyself” is utopian but more acceptable, for it embraces wickedness.
No pity. After the carnage we still retain the hope of a purified mankind. I speak only of
myself since I do not wish to convince, I have no right to drag others into my river, I oblige
no one to follow me and everybody practices his art in his own way, if be knows the joy that
rises like arrows to the astral layers, or that other joy that goes down into the mines of
corpse- flowers and fertile spasms. Stalactites: seek them everywhere, in managers magnified
by pain, eyes white as the hares of the angels.
And so Dada was born of a need for independence, of a distrust toward unity. Those who
are with us preserve their freedom. We recognize no theory. We have enough cubist and futurist
academies: laboratories of formal ideas. Is the aim of art to make money and cajole the nice nice
bourgeois? Rhymes ring with the assonance of the currencies and the inflexion slips along the
line of the belly in profile. All groups o f artists have arrived at this trust company utter riding
their steeds on various comets. While the door remains open to the possibility of wallowing in
cushions and good things to eat. […]
Cubism was born out of the simple w ay of looking at an object: Cezanne painted a cup
20 centimeters below his eyes, the cubists look at it from above, others complicate appearance by
making a perpendicular section and arranging it conscientiously on the side. (I do not forget the
creative artists and the profound laws of matter which they established once and for all.) The
futurist sees the same cup in movement, a succession of objects one beside the others and
maliciously adds a few force lines. This does not prevent the canvas from being a good or bad
painting suitable for the investment of intellectual capital.
The new painter creates a world, the elements of which are also its implements, a sober,
definite work without argument. The new artis t protests: he no longer paints (symbolic and
illusionist reproduction) but creates directly in stone, wood, iron, tin, boulders—locomotive
organisms capable of being turned in all directions by the limpid wind of momentary sensation.
All pictorial or plastic work is useless: let it then be a monstrosity that frightens servile minds,
and not sweetening to decorate the refectories of animals in human costume, illustrating the sad
fable of mankind.
* * *
Philosophy is the question: from which side shall we look at life, God, the idea or other
phenomena. Everything one looks at is false. I do not consider the relative result more important
than the choice between cake and cherries after dinner. The system of quickly looking at the
other side of a thing in order to impose your opinion indirectly is called dialectics, in other
words, haggling over the spirit of fried potatoes while dancing method around it.
If I cry out:
Ideal, ideal, ideal,
Knowledge, knowledge, knowledge,
Boomboom, boomboom, boomboom,
I have given a pretty faithful version of progress, law, morality and all other fine qualities that
various highly intelligent men have discussed in so many books, only to conclude that after all
everyone dances to his own personal boomboom, and t h a t t he w r i t er is entitled to his

boomboom: the satisfaction of pathological curiosity a private bell for inexplicable needs; a
bath; pecuniary difficulties; a stomach with repercussions in tile; the authority of the mystic
wand formulated as the bouquet of a phantom orchestra made up of silent fiddle bows greased
with filters made of chicken manure. With the blue eye-glasses of an angel they have excavated
the inner life for a dime’s worth of unanimous gratitude. If all of them are right and if all pills are
Pink Pills, let us try for once not to be right. Some people think they can explain rationally, by
thought, what they think. But that is extremely relative. Psychoanalysis is a dangerous disease, it
puts to sleep the anti-objective impulses of man and systematizes the bourgeoisie. There is
no ultimate Truth. The dialectic is an amusing mechanism which guides us / in a banal kind
of way / to the opinions we had in the first place. Does anyone think that, by a minute
refinement of logic, he had demonstrated the truth and established the correctness of these
opinions? Lo gic imprisoned by the senses is an organic disease. To this element philosophers
always like to add: the power of observation. But actually this magnificent quality of the
mind is the proof of its impotence. We observe, we regard from one or more points of view,
we choose them among the millions that exist. Experience is also a product of chance and
individual faculties. Science disgusts me as soon as it becomes a speculative system, loses its
character of utility that is so useless but is at least individual. I detest greasy objectivity, and
harmony, the science that finds everything in order. Carry on, my children, humanity . . .
Science says we are the servants of nature: everything is in order, make love and bash your
brains in. Carry on, my children, humanity, kind bourgeois and journalist virgins . . .I am
against systems, the most acceptable system is on principle to have none. To complete
oneself, to perfect oneself in one's own littleness, to fill the vessel with one's individuality, to
have the courage to fight for and against thought, the mystery of bread, the sudden burst of
an infernal propeller into economic lilies. […]
Active Simplicity
Inability to distinguish between degrees of clarity: to lick the penumbra and float in the big
mouth filled with honey and excrement. Measured by the scale of eternity, all activity is vain
- (if we allow thought to engage in an adventure the result of which would be infinitely
grotesque and add significantly to our knowledge of human impotence). But supposing life to
be a poor farce, without aim or initial parturition, and because we think it our duty to
extricate ourselves as fresh and clean as washed chrysanthemums, we have proclaimed as the
sole basis for agreement: art. It is not as important as we, mercenaries of the spirit, have been
proclaiming for centuries. Art afflicts no one and those who manage to take an interest in it
will harvest caresses and a fine opportunity to populate the country with their conversation.
Art is a private affair, the artist produces it for himself, an intelligible work is the product of
a journalist, and because at this moment it strikes my fancy to combine this monstrosity with
oil paints: a paper tube simulating the metal that is automatically pressed and poured hatred
cowardice villainy. The artist, the poet rejoice at the venom of the masses condensed into a
section chief of this industry, he is happy to be insulted: it is a proof of his immutability.
When a writer or artist is praised by the newspapers, it is a proof of the intelligibility of his
work: wretched lining of a coat for public use; tatters covering brutality, piss contributing to
the warmth of an animal brooding vile instincts. Flabby, insipid flesh reproducing with the
help of typographical microbes.

We have thrown out the cry-baby in us. Any infiltration of this kind is candied
diarrhea. To encourage this act is to 'digest it. What we need is works that are strong straight
precise and forever beyond understanding. Logic is a complication. Logic is always wrong. It
draws the threads of notions, words, in their formal exterior, toward illusory ends and
centers. Its chains kill, it is an enormous centipede stifling independence. Married to logic,
art would live in incest, swallowing, engulfing its own tail, still part of its own body,
fornicating within itself, and passion would become a nightmare tarred with protestantism, a
monument, a heap of ponderous gray entrails. But the suppleness, enthusiasm, eve n the joy of
injustice, this little truth which we practice innocently and which makes its beautiful: we are
subtle and our fingers are malleable and slippery as the branches of that sinuous, almost liquid
plant; it defines our soul, say the cynics. That too is a point of view; but all flowers are not
sacred, fortunately, and the divine thing in us is to call to anti- human action. I am speaking of a
paper flower for the buttonholes of the gentlemen who frequent the ball of masked life, the
kitche n of grace, white cousins lithe or fat. They traffic with whatever we have selected. The
contradiction and unity of poles in a single toss can be the truth. If one absolutely insists on
uttering this platitude, the appendix of a libidinous, malodorous morality. Morality creates
atrophy like every plague produced by intelligence. The control of morality and logic has
inflicted us with impassivity in the presence of policemen who are the cause of slavery, putrid
rats infecting the bowels of the bourgeoisie which have infected the only luminous clean
corridors of glass that remained open to artists.
Let each man proclaim: there is a great negative work of destruction to be
accomplished. We must sweep and clean. Affirm the cleanliness of the individual after the
state of madness, aggressive complete madness of a world abandoned to the hands of bandits,
who rend one another and destroy the centuries. Without aim or design, without organization:
indomitable madness, decomposition. Those who are strong in words or force will survive, for
they are quick in defense, the agility of limbs and sentiments flames on their faceted flanks.
Morality has determined charity and pity, two balls of fat that have grown like elephants, like
planets, and are called good. There is nothing good about them. Goodness is lucid, clear and
decided, pitiless toward compromise and politics. Morality is an injection of chocolate into the
veins of all men. This task is not ordered by a supernatural force but by the trust of idea
brokers and grasping academicians. Sentimentality: at the sight of a group of men quarreling
and bored, they invented the calendar and the medicament wisdom. With a sticking of labels
the battle of the philosophers was set off (mercantilism, scales, meticulous and petty measures)
and for the second time it was understood that pity is a sentiment like diarrhea in relation to the
disgust that destroys health, a foul attempt by carrion corpses to compromise the sun. I
proclaim the opposition of all cosmic faculties to this gonorrhea of a putrid sun issued from the
factories of philosophical thought, I proclaim bitter struggle with all the weapons of—
Dadaist Disgust
Every product of disgust capable of becoming a negation of the family is Dada; a protest with
the fists of its whole being engaged in destructive action: Dada; know ledge of all the means
rejected up unt il now by the shamefaced sex of comfortable compromise and good
manners: Dada; abolition o/ logic, which is t he dance of those impotent to create:
Dada; of ev ery social hierarchy and equation set up for the sake of values by our
valets: Dada: every object, all objects, sentiments, obscurities, apparitions and the

precise clash of parallel lines are weapons for the fight: Dada; abolition of memory:
Dada; abolition of archaeology: Dada; abolition of prophets: Dada; abolition of the
future: Dada; absolute and unquestionable faith in every go d that is the immediate
product of spontaneity: Dada; elegant and unprejudiced leap from a harmony to the other
sphere; trajectory of a word tossed like a screeching phonograph record; to respect all
individuals in their folly of the moment: whether it be serious, fearful, timid, ardent,
vigorous, determined, enthusiastic; to divest one's church of eve ry useless cumbersome
accessory; to spit out disagreeable or amorous ideas like a luminous waterfall, or coddle
them—with the extreme satisfaction that it doesn't matter in the least—with the same
intensity in the thicket of core's soul pure of insects for blood well-born, and gilded with
bodies of archangels. Freedom: Dada Dada Dada, a roaring of tense colors, and interlacing of
opposites and of all contradictions, grotesques, inconsistencies:
LIFE