The dissolution of Western Classical culture is a phenomenon that can be understood only
against the background of a social evolution which can end in the total collapse of a
principle of society thousands of years old and its replacement by a system whose laws are
based on the immediate demands of human vitality. The influence the ruling classes have
wielded over the creative consciousness in history has reduced art to an increasingly
dependent position, until finally the real psychic function of that art was attainable only for
a few spirits of genius who in their frustration and after a long struggle were able to break
out of the conventions of form and rediscover the basic principles of all creative activity.
Together with the class society from which it emerged, this culture of the individual is faced
by destruction too, as the former's institutions, kept alive artificially, offer no further
opportunities for the creative imagination and only impede the free expression of human
vitality. All the isms so typical of the last fifty years of art history re[resent so many
attempts to bring new life to this culture and to adapt its aesthetic to the barren ground of
its social environment. Modern art, suffering from a permanent tendency to the constructive,
an obsession with objectivity (brought on by the disease that has destroyed our speculative-
idealizing culture), stands isolated and powerless in a society which seems bent on its own
destruction. As the extension of a style created for the social elite, with the disappearance
of that elite modern art has lost its social justification and is confronted only by the
criticism formulated by a clique of connoisseurs and amateurs.
Western art, once the celebrator of emperors and popes, turned to serve the newly powerful
bourgeoisie, becoming an instrument of the glorification of bourgeois ideals. Now that these
ideals have become a fiction with the disappearance of their economic base, a new era is
upon us, in which the matrix of cultural conventions loses its significance and a new
freedom can be won from the most primary source of life. But, just as with a social
revolution, this spiritual revolution cannot be enticed without conflict. Stubbornly the
bourgeois mind clutches on its aesthetic ideal and in a last, desperate effort employs all its
wiles to convert the indifferent masses to the same belief. Taking advantage of the general
lack of interest, suggestions are made of a special social needs for what is referred to as
'an ideal of beauty,' all designed to prevent the flowering of a new, conflicting sense of
beauty which emerges from the vital emotions.
As early as the end of World War I the Dada movement tried by violent means to break
away from the old ideal of beauty. Although the movement concentrated increasingly on the
political arena, as the artists involved perceived that their struggle for freedom brought them
into conflict with the laws that formed the very foundations of society, the vital power
released by this confrontation also stimulated the birth of a new artistic vision.
Manifesto Reflex #1 September-October 1948 2
In 1924 the Surrealist Manifesto appeared, revealing a hitherto hidden creative impulse - it
seemed that a new source of inspiration had been discovered. But Breton's movement
suffocated in its own intellectualism, without ever converting its basic principle into a tangible
value. For Surrealism was an art of ideas and as such also infected by the disease of past
class culture, while the movement failed to destroy the values this culture proclaimed in its
own justification.
It is precisely this act of destruction that forms the key to the liberation of the human spirit
from passivity. It is the basic precondition for the flowering of a people's art that
encompasses everyone. The general social impotence, the passivity of the masses, are an
indication of the brakes that cultural norms apply to the natural expression of the forces of
life. For the satisfaction of this primitive need for vital expression is the driving force of life,
the cure for every form of vital weakness. It transforms art into a power for spiritual health.
As such it is the property of all and for this reason every limitation that reduces art to the
reserve of a small group of specialists, connoisseurs, and virtuosi must be removed.
But this people's art is not an art that necessarily conforms to the norms set by the people,
for they expect what they were brought up they with, unless they have had the opportunity
to experience something different. In other words, unless the people themselves are actively
involved in the making of art. A people art is a form of expression nourished only by a
natural and therefore general urge to expression. Instead of solving problems preconceived
aesthetic ideal, this art recognizes only the norms of expressivity, spontaneously directed by
its own intuition. The great value of a people's art is that, precisely because it is the form
of expression of the untrained, the greatest possible latitude is given the unconscious,
thereby opening up ever wider perspectives for the comprehension of the secret of life. In
the art of genius too, Western Classical culture has recognized the value of the unconscious,
for it was the unconscious which made possible a partial liberation from the conventions
which bound art. But this could only be achieved after a long, personal process of
development, and was always seen as revolutionary. The cycle of revolutionary deeds which
we call the evolution of art has now entered its last phase: the loosening of stylistic
conventions. Already weakened by Impressionism, laid bare by Cubism (and later by
Constructivism and Neo-Plasticism), it signifies the end of art as a force of aesthetic idealism
on a higher plane than life. What we call 'genius' is nothing else but the power of the
individual to free himself from the ruling aesthetic and place himself above it. As this
aesthetic loses its stranglehold, and with the disappearance of the exceptional personal
performance, 'genius' will become public property and the word 'art' will acquire a completely
new meaning. That is not to say that the expression of all people will take on a similar
generalized value, but that everyone will be able to express himself because the genius of
the people, a fountain in which everyone can bathe, replaces the individual performance.
In this period of change, the role of the creative artist can only be that of the revolutionary:
it is his duty to destroy the last remnants of an empty, irksome aesthetic, arousing the
creative instincts still slumbering unconscious in the human mind. The masses, brought up
with aesthetic conventions imposed from without, are as yet unaware of their creative
Manifesto Reflex #1 September-October 1948 3
potential. This will be stimulated by an art which does not define but suggests, by the
arousal of associations and the speculations which come forth from them, creating a new
and fantastic way of seeing. The onlooker's creative ability (inherent in human nature) will
bring this new way of seeing within everyone's reach once aesthetic conventions cease to
hinder the working of the unconscious.
Hitherto condemned to a purely passive role in our culture, the onlooker will himself become
involved in the creative process. The interaction between creator and observer makes art of
this kind a powerful stimulator in the birth of the creativity of the people. The ever greater
dissolution and ever more overt impotence of our culture makes the struggle of today's
creative artists easier than that of their predecessors - time is on their side. The
phenomenon of 'kitsch' has spread so quickly that today it overshadows more cultivated
forms of expression, or else is so intimately interwoven with them that a demarcation line is
difficult to draw. Thanks to these developments, the power of the old ideals of beauty is
doomed to decay and eventually disappear and a new artistic principle, now coming into
being, will automatically replace them. This new principle is based on the total influence of
matter on the creative spirit. This creative concept is not one of the theories or forms,
which could be described as solidified matter, but arises from the confrontation between the
human spirit and raw materials that suggest forms and ideas.
Every definition of form restricts the material effect and with it the suggestion it projects.
Suggestive art is materialistic art because only matter stimulates creative activity, while the
more perfectly defined the form, the less active is the onlooker. Because we see the
activation of the urge to create as art's most important task, in the coming period we will
strive for the greatest possible materialistic and therefore greatest possible suggestive effect.
Viewed in this light, the creative act is more important than that which it creates, while the
latter will gain in significance the more it reveals the work which brought it into being and
the less it appears as a polished end-product. The illusion has been shattered that a work
of art has a fixed value: its value is dependent on the creative ability of the onlooker, which
in turn is stimulated by the suggestion the work of art arouses. Only living art can activate
the creative spirit, and only living art is of general significance. For only living art gives
expression to the emotions, yearnings, reactions and ambitions which as a result of society's
shortcomings we all share.
A living art makes no distinction between beautiful and ugly because it sets no aesthetic
norms. The ugly which in the art of past centuries has come to supplement the beautiful is
a permanent complaint against the unnatural class society and its aesthetic of virtuosity; it
is a demonstration of the retarding and limiting influence of this aesthetic on the natural
urge to create. If we observe forms of expression that include every stage of human life, for
example that of a child, who has yet to be socially integrated), then we no longer find this
distinction. The child knows of no law other than its spontaneous sensation of life and feels
no need to express anything else. the same is true of primitive cultures, which is why they
are so attractive to today's human beings, forced to live in a morbid atmosphere of
unreality, lies and infertility. A new freedom is coming into being which will enable human
Manifesto Reflex #1 September-October 1948 4
beings to express themselves in accordance with their instincts. This change will deprive the
artist of his special position and meet with stubborn resistance. for, as his individually won
freedom becomes the possession of all, the artist's entire individual and social status will be
undermined.
Our art is the art of a revolutionary period, simultaneously the reaction of a world going
under and the herald of a new era. For this reason it does not conform to the ideals of the
first, while those of the second have yet to be formulated. But it is the expression of a life
force that is all the stronger for being resisted, and of considerable psychological
significance in the struggle to establish a new society. The spirit of the bourgeoisie still
permeates all areas of life, and now and then it even pretends to bring art to the people (a
special people, that is, set to its hand).
But this art is too stale to serve as a drug any longer. The chalkings on pavements and
walls clearly show that human beings were born to manifest themselves; now the struggle is
in full swing against the power that would force them into the straitjacket of a clerk or
commoner and deprive them of this first vital need. A painting is not a composition of color
and line but an animal, a night, a scream, a human being, or all of these things together.
The objective, abstracting spirit of the bourgeois world has reduced painting to the means
which brought it into being; the creative imagination, however, seeks to recognize every form
and even in the sterile environment of the abstract it has created a new relationship with
reality, turning on the suggestive power which every natural or artificial form possesses for
the active onlooker. This suggestive power knows no limits and so one can say that after a
period in which it meant NOTHING, art has now entered an era in which it means
EVERYTHING.
The cultural vacuum has never been so strong or so widespread as after the last war, when
the continuity of centuries of cultural evolution was broken by a single jerk of the string.
The Surrealists, who in their rejection of the cultural order threw artistic expression
overboard, experienced the disillusionment and bitterness of talent become useless in a
destructive campaign against art, against a society which, though they recognized its
responsibility, was still strong enough to be considered as theirs. However, painters after
World War II see themselves confronted by a world of stage decors and false façades in
which all lines of communication have been cut and all hope has vanished. The total lack of
a future as a continuation of this world makes constructive thought impossible. Their only
salvation is to turn their backs on the entire culture (including modern negativism, Surrealism
and Existentialism). In this process of liberation it becomes increasingly apparent that this
culture, unable to make artistic expression possible, can only make it impossible. The
materialism of these painters did not lead, as bourgeois idealists had warned, to a spiritual
void (like their own?), nor to creative impotence. On the contrary, for the first time every
faculty of the human spirit was activated in a fertile relationship with matter. At the same
time a process was started in which ties and specific cultural forms which in this phase still
played a role were naturally thrown off, just as they were in other areas of life.
Manifesto Reflex #1 September-October 1948 5
The problematic phase in the evolution of modern art has come to an end and is being
followed by an experimental period. In other words, from the experience gained in this state
of unlimited freedom, the rules are being formulated which will govern the new form of
creativity. Come into being more or less unawares, in line with the laws of dialectics a new
consciousness will follow.