WE: VARIANT OF A MANIFESTO
We call ourselves kinoks-as opposed to “cinematographers,”
We see no connection between true kinochestvoand the
We consider the psychological Russo-German filmdrama-
a herd of junkmen doing rather well peddlingtheir rags.
cunning and calculation of the profiteers.
weighed down with apparitions and childhood memories-an
absurdity.

To the American adventure film with its showy dynamism and to
the dramatizations of the American Pinkertons the kinoks say thanks
for the rapid shot changes and the close-ups. Good . . . but disor-
derly, not based on a precise study of movement. A cut above the
psychologicaldrama, but still lacking in foundation. A cliche. A copy
of a copy.

WE proclaim the old films, based on the romance, theatrical films
-Keep away from them!
-Keep your eyes off them!
-They’re mortally dangerous!
-Contagious!
WE affirm the future of cinema art by denying its present.
“Cinematography” must die so that the art of cinema may live.
We protest against that mixing of the arts which many call synthe-
and the like, to be leprous.
WE call for its death to be hastened.
sis. The mixture of bad colors, even those ideally selected from the
spectrum, produces not white, but mud.
Synthesis should come at the summit of each art’s achievement
and not before.
WE are cleansing kinochesfvo of foreign matter-of music, litera-
ture, and theater; we seek our own rhythm, one lifted from nowhere
else, and we find it in the movements of things.
WE invite you:
-to flee-
the sweet embraces of the romance,
the poison of the psychological novel,
the clutches of the theater of adultery;
to turn your back on music,
-to flee-
out into the open, into fourdimensions (three + time), in search
of our own material, our meter and rhythm.
The “psychological” prevents man from being as precise as a
stopwatch; it interferes with his desire for kinship with the machine.
In an art of movement we have no reason to devote our particular
attention to contemporary man.
The machine makes us ashamed of man’s inability to control
himself, but what are we to do if electricity’sunerring ways are more
exciting to us than the disorderly haste of active men and the
corrupting inertia of passive ones?
intelligible than that on human dance floors.
man as a subject for film.
Saws dancing at a sawmill convey to us a joy more intimate and
For his inability to control his movements, WE temporarily exclude
romanco.

Our path leads through the poeny of machines, from the bungling
In revealing the machine’s soul, in causing the worker to love his
we introduce creative joy into all mechanical labor,
we bring people into closer kinship with machines,
we foster new people.
The new man, free of unwieldiness and clumsiness, will have the
citizen to the perfect electric man.
workbench, the peasant his tractor, the engineer his engine-
light, precise movements of machines, and he will be the gratifying
subject of our films.
Openly recognizing the rhythm of machines, the delight of
mechanical labor, the perceptionof the beauty of chemical pro-
cesses, WE sing of earthquakes, we compose film epics of electric
power plants and flame, we delight in the movements of comets and
meteors and the gestures of searchlights that dazzle the stars.
Everyone who cares for his art seeks the essence of his own
technique.
Cinema’s unstrung nerves need a rigorous system of precise
movement.
The meter, tempo, and type of movement, as well as its precise
locationwith respect to the axes of a shot’s coordinates and per-
haps to the axes of universal coordinates (the three dimensions +
the fourth-time), should be studied and taken into account by each
creator in the field of cinema.
components of movement worth filming and screening.
succession of images is what’s required of montage.
objects in space as a rhythmical artistic whole, in harmony with the
properties of the material and the internal rhythm of each object.
Intervals (the transitions from one movement to another) are the
material, the elements of the art of movement, and by no means the
movements themselves. It is they (the intervals) which draw the
movement to a kinetic resolution.

Radical necessity, precision, and speed are the three
components of movement worth filming and screening.
The geometrical extract of movement through an exciting

Kinochesfvo is the art of organizing the necessafy movements of
montago.

The organization of movement is the organization of its elements,
or its intervals, into phrases.
In each phrase there is a rise, a high point, and a falling off
(expressedin varying degrees) of movement.
A composition is made of phrases, just as a phrase is made of
intervals of movement.
A kinok who has conceived a film epic or fragment should be
able to jot it down with precision so as to give it life on the screen,
should favorable technical conditions be present.
The most complete scenario cannot, of course, replace these
notes, just as a libretto does not replace pantomime, just as literary
accowtts of Scriabin’s compositions do not convey any notion of his
music.
graphic symbols of movement.
To represent a dynamic study on a sheet of paper, we need
WE are in search of the film scale.
WE fall, we rise . . . together with the rhythm of movements-
runningfrom us. past us. toward us.
in a circle, or straight line, or ellipse,
to the right and left, with plus and minus signs;
movements bend, straighten, divide, break apart,
multiply, shooting noiselesslythrough space.
Cinema is, as well, the art of inventingmovementsof things in
space in response to the demands of science; it embodies the
inventor’s dream-be he scholar, artist, engineer, or carpenter; it is
the realizationby kinochestvo of that which cannot be realized in life.
Drawings in motion. Blueprints in motion. Plans for the future. The
theory of relativity on the screen.
WE greet the ordered fantasy of movement.
Our eyes, spinning like propellers, take off into the future on the
WE believe that the time is at hand when we shall be able to hurl
slowed and accelerated,
wings of hypothesis.
into space the hurricanes of movement, reined in by our tactical
lassoes.
volumes.
poetry of levers, wheels, and wings of steel;the iron cry of
movements; the blinding grimaces of red-hot streams.
Hurrah for dynamk geometry,the race of points, lines, planes,
Hurrah for the poetry of machines, propelled and driving; the
